---
bibliography: 2022-06-20-Deplatforming.bib
csl: alpha.csl
date: 2022-06-20
layout: post
lead: Merriam-Webster has defined Deplatforming as an ‘attempt to
  boycott a group or individual through removing the platforms (such as
  speaking venues or websites) used to share information or ideas’
link-citations: true
name_file: 2022-06-deplatforming
numbersections: true
permalink: /posts/2022/06/deplatforming
section-divs: true
title: What does research really tell us about deplatforming?
---

Merriam-Webster has defined Deplatforming as an *\`\`attempt to boycott
a group or individual through removing the platforms (such as speaking
venues or websites) used to share information or ideas’’*
\[[Merr18](#ref-meriamwebster_good_2018)\]. Prominent cases of
deplatforming in social media include the banning of: 1) Toxic
subreddits (standalone communities hosted within the Reddit social
network) like r/FatPeopleHate, r/ChapoTrapHouse, and r/The_Donald. 2)
Accounts associated with far-right and conspiratorial communities like
QAnon and the Alt-right. 3) Influencers spousing far-right or
conspiratorial beliefs like Alex Jones, Laura Loomer, and Milo
Yiannopoulos.

Previous research has explored the effects of deplatforming, trying to
characterize the effects of deplatforming broadly. For instance,
\[[CPSG17](#ref-chandrasekharan2017you)\] studied how Reddit evolved
circa 2015 after banning r/FatPeopleHate and r/CoonTown, two large toxic
communities on the platform. They found that, within Reddit, a large
percentage of users previously active in these communities stopped
posting on the website and that those who continued drastically reduced
their hate speech usage (as measured through a dictionary). Also
considering within-platform effects,
\[[JBYB21](#ref-jhaver2021evaluating)\] studied the banning of three
high-profile influences on Twitter. Considering users that previously
engaged with these accounts, they again found a decrease in the activity
and toxicity (as measured through Google’s Perspective API).

These within-platform studies are limited as they analyze the specific
social networks where deplatforming occurred. Still, deplatformed
influencers and communities usually migrate to alternative social
networks or standalone websites. For instance, banned influencers like
Alex Jones continued to be active on Gab
\[[Ally21](#ref-allyn_social_2021)\] (an alt-tech social media similar
to Twitter) and used Telegram to broadcast content
\[[Roge20](#ref-rogers2020deplatforming)\]; Communities like Fat People
Hate migrated to Voat \[[MePa22](#ref-mekacher2022can)\] (a now-defunct
Reddit clone); and r/The_Donald even went as far as creating their own
standalone social media, patriots.win
\[[HJZB21](#ref-horta2021platform)\] (formerly thedonald.win).

Other papers address this limitation by studying pairs of social media
platforms. \[[UrKa22](#ref-urman2022they)\] found that far-right
Telegram groups experienced explosive growth coinciding with the banning
of far-right actors on mainstream social media platforms.
\[[ASAB21](#ref-ali2021understanding)\] developed a method for
identifying the same user across different pairs of social networks –
Twitter and Gab, and Reddit and Gab. They find that the activity and
toxicity of these users grow on Gab when they get banned on Twitter or
Reddit (although their reach declines). Subsequent work found largely
the same effects \[[Mitt21](#ref-mitts2021banned)\].
\[[HJZB21](#ref-horta2021platform)\] studied the banning of two
prominent Reddit communities that went on to create standalone websites:
r/The_Donald and r/Incels. They found that activity decreased for both
communities following the platform migration but that toxicity (as
measured by Perspective API) increased only for The Donald (perhaps due
to the cryptic language used in Incel communities).
\[[RaKa21](#ref-rauchfleisch2021deplatforming)\] studied the migration
of deplatformed YouTube channels to Bitchute, finding that they receive
drastically fewer views on the latter.

These across-platform studies cast doubt on the effectiveness of
deplatforming. Overall activity and reach decrease in newer platforms
\[[HJZB21](#ref-horta2021platform)\]
\[[ASAB21](#ref-ali2021understanding)\] and in the platforms that
carried out deplatformed, as pointed out by within-platform studies.
However, there seems to be substantial migration to alternative
platforms where hate speech runs rampant
\[[FrMaKr20](#ref-freelon2020false)\], and users that migrate become
more toxic \[[HJZB21](#ref-horta2021platform)\]
\[[ASAB21](#ref-ali2021understanding)\] — this is done considering
matched users, so self-selection does not explain this effect. These
results suggest a trade-off: deplatforming may lead to more toxic
communities that are also smaller and have less reach.

Nonetheless, this work must also be considered with a grain of salt.
First, most these studies only consider *active engagement traces* —
likes, comments, posts, etc. It may very well be that the number of
lurkers (i.e., users who consume content but do not actively engage in
the discussions) increases on fringe platforms, given that they often
allow full access without registration. In that context, previous work
may be underestimating the reach and (passive) user activity in alt-tech
social media platforms. Further, these studies consider unilateral
migratory movements; they track how users banned in a specific
mainstream platform behave on another specific fringe platform. However,
there is no good reason to believe that users would not spread the time
they previously spent on Reddit or Twitter across a variety of other
platforms – including less public-facing ones like Telegram or Discord
\[[Roge20](#ref-rogers2020deplatforming)\]
\[[UrKa22](#ref-urman2022they)\]
\[[CoScMa19](#ref-conway_right-wing_2019)\].

Last and more subtly, the work discussed here papers are also limited in
that they do not consider or model network effects. It is well known
that the utility of social media depends on the number of users
\[[Luca15](#ref-luca2015user)\] — thus, it is naïve to conclude that the
effects of banning controversial opinions would be constant. As Gab,
Parler, and others receive more migrants, their utility will likely
increase. Thus, it is tricky to generalize the effect of the bans on
specific influencers and communities.

## References

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body" markdown="1">

<div id="ref-allyn_social_2021" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[Ally21\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Allyn, Bobby</span>:
Social Media Site Gab Is Surging, Even As Critics Blame It For Capitol
Violence. *NPR*.</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-ali2021understanding" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[ASAB21\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Ali, Shiza</span> ;
<span class="smallcaps">Saeed, Mohammad Hammas</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">Aldreabi, Esraa</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">Blackburn, Jeremy</span> ; <span class="smallcaps">De
Cristofaro, Emiliano</span> ; <span class="smallcaps">Zannettou,
Savvas</span> ; <span class="smallcaps">Stringhini, Gianluca</span>:
Understanding the effect of deplatforming on social networks. In:
*Proceedings of the ACM Web Science Conference*, 2021</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-conway_right-wing_2019" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[CoScMa19\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Conway, Maura</span> ;
<span class="smallcaps">Scrivens, Ryan</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">Macnair, Logan</span>: *[Right-Wing Extremists’
Persistent Online Presence: History and Contemporary
Trends](https://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep19623)* : International
Centre for Counter-Terrorism, 2019</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-chandrasekharan2017you" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[CPSG17\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Chandrasekharan,
Eshwar</span> ; <span class="smallcaps">Pavalanathan, Umashanthi</span>
; <span class="smallcaps">Srinivasan, Anirudh</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">Glynn, Adam</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">Eisenstein, Jacob</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">Gilbert, Eric</span>: You Can’t Stay Here: The
Efficacy of Reddit’s 2015 Ban Examined Through Hate Speech. In:
*Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction* (2017)</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-freelon2020false" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[FrMaKr20\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Freelon, Deen</span> ;
<span class="smallcaps">Marwick, Alice</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">Kreiss, Daniel</span>: False equivalencies: Online
activism from left to right. In: *Science* (2020), Nr. 6508,
S. 1197–1201</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-horta2021platform" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[HJZB21\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Horta Ribeiro,
Manoel</span> ; <span class="smallcaps">Jhaver, Shagun</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">Zannettou, Savvas</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">Blackburn, Jeremy</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">Stringhini, Gianluca</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">De Cristofaro, Emiliano</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">West, Robert</span>: Do Platform Migrations Compromise
Content Moderation? Evidence from r/The_Donald and r/Incels. In:
*Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction* (2021)</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-jhaver2021evaluating" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[JBYB21\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Jhaver, Shagun</span> ;
<span class="smallcaps">Boylston, Christian</span> ; <span
class="smallcaps">Yang, Diyi</span> ; <span class="smallcaps">Bruckman,
Amy</span>: Evaluating the effectiveness of deplatforming as a
moderation strategy on Twitter. In: *Proceedings of the ACM on
Human-Computer Interaction* (2021)</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-luca2015user" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[Luca15\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Luca, Michael</span>:
User-generated content and social media. In: *Handbook of media
Economics*. Bd. 1 : Elsevier, 2015, S. 563–592</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-mekacher2022can" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[MePa22\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Mekacher, Amin</span> ;
<span class="smallcaps">Papasavva, Antonis</span>: "I Can’t Keep It Up"
A Dataset from the Defunct Voat.co News Aggregator. In: *Proceedings of
the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media*, 2022</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-meriamwebster_good_2018" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[Merr18\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Merriam-Webster</span>:
The Good, The Bad, & The Semantically Imprecise.</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-mitts2021banned" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[Mitt21\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Mitts, Tamar</span>:
Banned: How Deplatforming Extremists Mobilizes Hate in the Dark Corners
of the Internet (2021)</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-rauchfleisch2021deplatforming" class="csl-entry"
markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[RaKa21\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Rauchfleisch,
Adrian</span> ; <span class="smallcaps">Kaiser, Jonas</span>:
Deplatforming the far-right: An analysis of YouTube and BitChute. In:
*SSRN* (2021)</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-rogers2020deplatforming" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[Roge20\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Rogers, Richard</span>:
Deplatforming: Following extreme Internet celebrities to Telegram and
alternative social media. In: *European Journal of Communication* Bd. 35
(2020), Nr. 3, S. 213–229</span>

</div>

<div id="ref-urman2022they" class="csl-entry" markdown="1">

<span class="csl-left-margin">\[UrKa22\] </span><span
class="csl-right-inline"><span class="smallcaps">Urman,
Aleksandra</span> ; <span class="smallcaps">Katz, Stefan</span>: What
they do in the shadows: examining the far-right networks on Telegram.
In: *Information, communication & society* (2022), Nr. 7,
S. 904–923</span>

</div>

</div>
